Kaufman’s Efficiency Ratio (KER)
[helping to determine whether to apply a trend following algorithm or a mean reversion algorithm]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Efficiency Ratio (ER) was first presented by Perry Kaufman in his 1995 book ‘Smarter Trading‘.  It is calculated by dividing the price change over a period by the absolute sum of the price movements that occurred to achieve that change.  The resulting ratio ranges between 0 and 1 with higher values representing a more efficient or trending market.

The value of the ER ranges between 0 and 1. It has the value of 1 when prices move in the same direction for the full time over which the indicator is calculated, e.g. n bars period. It has a value of 0 when prices are unchanged over the n periods. When prices move in wide swings within the interval, the sum of the denominator becomes very large compared to the numerator and ER approaches zero.

Some uses for ER:
– A qualifier for a trend following trade; a trend is considered “persistent” only when RE is above a certain value, e.g. 0.3 or 0.4
– A filter to screen out choppy stocks/markets, where breakouts are frequently “fakeouts”.
– In an adaptive trading system, helping to determine whether to apply a trend following algorithm or a mean reversion algorithm.
– It is used in the calculation of Kaufman’s Adaptive Moving Average (KAMA).
How To Calculate the Efficiency Ratio

ER = Direction / Volatility

Where:

Direction = ABS (Close – Close[n])

Volatility = n ∑ (ABS(Close – Close[1]))

n = The efficiency ratio period.


-------------------------------------------
In case the market is trending smoother, then the ratio will be higher. In case the ratio shows readings in proximity to zero, this implies that market movement is inefficient and ”choppy”.

If the Efficiency Ratio shows a reading of +100, this means that the trading instrument is in a bull trend and trending with perfect efficiency.

If the Efficiency Ratio shows a reading of -100, this means that the trading instrument is in a bear trend and trending with perfect efficiency.

It is impossible for any instrument to have a perfect Efficiency ratio, because any movement against the major trend during the examined period of time would cause the ratio to drop.

If the Efficiency Ratio shows a reading above +30, this is indicative of a smoother bull trend. If the ratio shows a reading below -30, this is indicative of a smoother bear trend.
